.TH MCAT 1 "February 2026" "mcat 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
mcat \- cat on steroids
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mcat
[\fIOPTION\fR]... [\fIFILE\fR]...
.SH DESCRIPTION
Concatenate FILE(s) to standard output. With no FILE, or when FILE is -, read standard input.
.PP
mcat is a drop-in replacement for cat that additionally understands structured formats
(Parquet, Avro, ORC, CSV, JSONL) and remote sources (S3, GCS, HTTP).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-n, \-\-number
Number all output lines.
.TP
.B \-b, \-\-number\-nonblank
Number non-blank output lines.
.TP
.B \-s, \-\-squeeze\-blank
Suppress repeated empty output lines.
.TP
.B \-A, \-\-show\-all
Equivalent to \fB\-vET\fR.
.TP
.B \-E, \-\-show\-ends
Display $ at end of each line.
.TP
.B \-T, \-\-show\-tabs
Display TAB characters as ^I.
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-show\-nonprinting
Use ^ and M- notation, except for LFD and TAB.
.TP
.B \-e
Equivalent to \fB\-vE\fR.
.TP
.B \-t
Equivalent to \fB\-vT\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-format\fR=\fIFORMAT
Output format for structured files: table, jsonl, csv, raw.
.TP
.B \-\-head\fR=\fIN
Show first N rows of structured files.
.TP
.B \-\-tail\fR=\fIN
Show last N rows of structured files.
.TP
.B \-\-schema
Print schema of structured files only.
.TP
.B \-\-columns\fR=\fICOL1,COL2,...
Select specific columns from structured files.
.TP
.B \-V, \-\-version
Display version information.
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
mcat file.txt
mcat -n file.txt
mcat data.parquet
mcat --format jsonl data.parquet
mcat s3://bucket/data.parquet
echo hello | mcat
.fi
.SH AUTHOR
Christy Jacob <christyjacob4@users.noreply.github.com>
.SH LICENSE
MIT
